Patrik Jansson and Cezar Ionescu in the DSL workpackage of GRACeFUL have worked together with a pedagogical project at Chalmers to develop and improve a BSc level university course on "Domain Specific Languages of Mathematics (DSLsofMath)". All the course material is available online at [github](https://github.com/DSLsofMath/DSLsofMath). The course contents (including exercises) is collected in lecture notes (currently 108 pages, and growing).

The course was developed in response to difficulties faced by third-year computer science students in learning and applying classical mathematics (mainly real and complex analysis). The main idea is to encourage the students to approach mathematical domains from a functional programming perspective: to identify the main functions and types involved and, when necessary, to introduce new abstractions; to give calculational proofs; to pay attention to the syntax of the mathematical expressions; and, finally, to organize the resulting functions and types in domain-specific languages.

GRACeFUL is aimed at computer-aided policy making of Climate Resiliant Urban Design and other Global Systems Science (GSS) applications. Any GSS model is bound to involve different scientific fields and often the common specification language is "mathematics". But to be "computer-aided" means we also need *implementation* languages. There is often a *large* gap between a mathematical model and its implementation. The GRACeFUL project methodology to bridge this gap is to use domain specific languages (DSLs). This means that DSLs of mathematics could be really useful in the undergraduate curriculum. At the time of the GRACeFUL project application (in 2014) there was no such course in the curriculum and we therefore handed in a local Chalmers application for a pedagogical project in parallell with GRACeFUL. Both applications were granted and by the end of GRACeFUL ther third instance of the course will be ongoing.
