2016-11-24: GRACeFUL Chalmers meeting

Agenda:
* gmb-tool status and WP2 workshop report
* Semantics + plans for 2016-12 workshop

## gmb-tool status and WP2 workshop report

MaAl and OsAb took part in the WP2 workshop at Deltares in Delft last
week.

Main things:
* one of the Franuhofer sites (IAIS) is severely under-staffed at the moment
    * very little software is available
* ToCr + MiBl have re-evaluated what the GMB tool should be able to do.
    * less priority on maps and GIS (geographical information systems)
    * more priority on "the generic library" (components with constraints etc.)
* Presentation of a toy case
    * Available in seafile under Seafile/GRACeFUL/Meetings/2016-11-14 Delft Architecture/
    * looks like a hybrid model (discrete + continuous)
    * inspiration and examples from the CLOCKWISe project
* MaAl is actively implementing [a DSL in Haskell](https://github.com/GRACeFUL-project/GenericLibrary) based on ideas from
    * ToCr's description of CLOCKWISe
    * the AUTOSAR DSL from the RAWFP project
    * TODO: Max+Oskar will present the initial status + questions to the rest of the consortium during the GRACeFUL teconf next week.
    * TODO: Max+Oskar prepare some kind of pres./demo for the DSL+CFP work spring 2016-12.

## Semantics + plans for [2016-12 workshop](../2016-12/)

Solrun and Maximilian have been working on the semantics and there is
a common theme emerging.

Patrik presents the plan so far for the 2016-12 DSL+CFP workshop.

General discussion about what needs to change now based on the work
done Oct-Nov.

TODO: Solrun will update the workshop page, prepare an agenda and interact with LoKe about the catering.

TODO: Bj√∂rn prepares some presentation/demo of some QuickCheck use for the DSL+CFP connection (for the 2016-12 work sprint).

## Other matters

* [2017-02](../2017-02): General assembly

AlGe will lead the organisation of the GRACeFUL general assembly
meeting late january. A doodle is out and Jan 30-31 looks most
likely. (It became Feb. 2-3.)

* [D4.2](../../deliverables/d4.2/): Status and timeline
    * Today: Patrik presents the skeleton document for D4.2 (due 2017-01-31)
    * "DSL for description of concept maps, with formal semantics (m24)"
    * Aim: have a draft ready before the 2016-12 meeting
	* Improve during the meeting
	* Submit almost final version to "internal review" 2017-01-20 (send to the GRACeFUL mailing list)
	* Submit final version 2017-01-30
