2016-11-30: Some informal notes from the GRACeFUL telconf

Max        Chalmers
Bj√∂rn      Chalmers
Oskar      Chalmers
Patrik     Chalmers
Solrun     Chalmers
Tom        UPC
Steffen    IAIS (new)
Sadie      Deltares
Michiel    Deltares
Linda      Nijmegen
Martin     IDMT
Marie      IAIS
Klara+Tom  KULeuven
...

----------------

Steffen (new project leader at IAIS) describes the restructuring at
IAIS. The previous group has dissolved and a new group is forming - a
bit unclear yet who will work with Steffen on GRACeFUL from 2017.
Requested help in collecting requirements for the manning.

----

Patrik: the main requirement from our side is experience with the
declarative programming paradigm (functional-, logic-, constraint-
programming). We use Haskell for the DSLs and the existing editor
components are in Javascript.

----

Max.: we've started to implement a DSL for the "stock and flow"-like
diagrams described during the Delft work meeting. See the github repo

  https://github.com/GRACeFUL-project/GenericLibrary

----

Patrik: There are now plans for two upcoming meetings at Chalmers:

DSL+CFP work sprint (with Solrun as main contact)

  https://github.com/GRACeFUL-project/DSL-WP/tree/master/2016-12

GRACeFUL Y2 meeting and General Assembly (with Alex as main contact)

  https://github.com/GRACeFUL-project/DSL-WP/tree/master/2017-02

----

Discussion on the final touches for

  D3.2 "VA EDA Requirements & Specifications Document rev.2"

and

  D2.4 "Prototype Status Report"

----
