(Raw notes by Patrik from the GRACeFUL Chalmers site meeting.)

* Fri 2016-10-14 at 11:00 in EDIT-6128: Weekly Chalmers GRACeFUL
    * MaAl presentation of the existing source code + discussion
    * Decide travel / participation plans for the "RAT architecture work sprint"
    * Q&A session about the project and the contacts at different sites

----------------

MaAl presenting the current state of the GRACeFUL source code.

> link :: a -> GraphSyntax a   -- return of the State monad
> (>+>) :: GraphSyntax Name -> Name -> GraphSyntax Name

Operators defined to give a nice syntax.

> prop a b c = (link a >+> b >+> c) === ((link a >+> b) >> (link b >+> c))

TODO: implement and check this property (with a suitable definition of (===))

> constrain :: IsConstraint Name Requirement a => a -> GraphSyntax ()

> data Sign = P | M | Questionmark

> (:=) :: name -> val -> Equality name val

|solveAndRelabel| can be used to translate to a constraint solver (via
Haskelzink), solve the contraints and translate the results back.

OsAb: what about time?

SoEi: what about weak and strong influence?

MaAl: all good questions - we have done a bit on both but it is still ongoing work.

----------------

Decide travel / participation plans for the "RAT architecture work sprint"

MaAl + OsAb

----------------

Contact attempts ongoing!

SoEi: email to Klara, Ekaterina (answer: dropbox folder), Nicolas
  Next actions: read papers and code

OsAb: email to Michiel + Sadie (presentation + questions)
  Next actions: start preparing the Deltares meeting

MaAl: prep. source code presentation + work on a new model
  Next actions: rewriting the ConstraintDSL (using syntactic etc.)

(BjNo: starting in two weeks)

(AlGe: starting later)

----------------

Next meeting:
* Intro: Probabilistic semantics

Done: PaJa: send doodle for CFP meeting
